---
layout: subpage
title: "Pietas as Scelus in the Philomela Myth of Ovid's Metamorphoses (6.424-674)"
permalink: /JCL2022
---

**Presenter**: Daniel Libatique, Fairfield University  
**Twitter**: [@DLibatique10](https://twitter.com/dlibatique10)  
**Website**: [https://libatique.info](https://libatique.info)  
**Email**: *DLibatique [at] fairfield.edu*

November 4, 2022  
Boston College High School  
Jesuit Latin Colloquium

***

## Passages

### 1. Ovid *Metamorphoses* 6.634-635

*‘cui sis nupta uide, <u>Pandione nata</u>, marito:  
degeneras; scelus est <u>pietas</u> in coniuge Terei.’*  

“Look at the husband to whom you’ve been married, **daughter of Pandion**; you dishonor your family; **dutifulness** is an evil in the wife of Tereus.”

***

### 2. Ov. *Met.* 6.473-474

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*ipso sceleris molimine Tereus  
creditur esse <u>pius</u> laudemque a crimine sumit.*  

By his very effort at wickedness, Tereus is believed to be **dutiful**, and he reaps praise from his crime.

***

### 3. Ov. *Met.* 6.458-460

*digna quidem facies, sed et hunc innata libido  
exstimulat, pronumque genus regionibus illis  
in Venerem est; flagrat uitio gentisque suoque.*  

Her appearance was indeed worthy, but an inherent libido also goads him on, and the peoples in those regions are inclined towards Venus; he burns with both his people’s vice and his own.

***

### 4. Ov. *Met.* 6.496-503

*‘hanc ego, care gener, quoniam <u>pia</u> causa coegit  
et uoluere ambae (uoluisti tu quoque, Tereu),  
do tibi perque fidem cognataque pectora supplex,  
per superos oro, patrio ut tuearis amore  
et mihi sollicitae lenimen dulce senectae  
quam primum (omnis erit nobis mora longa) remittas.  
tu quoque quam primum (satis est procul esse sororem),  
si <u>pietas</u> ulla est, ad me, Philomela, redito.’*  

“Dear son-in-law, because a **dutiful** cause compels me, and both my girls want it (you wanted it too, Tereus), I grant Philomela to you, and I pray as a suppliant by faith and our kindred hearts, by the gods, that you watch her with a father’s love and send back as soon as possible this sweet comfort to my worried old age (every delay will be a long one to us). You too, as soon as possible (it is enough that your sister is far away), if there is any **dutifulness**, return to me, Philomela.”

***

### 5. Ov. *Met.* 6.519-526

*iamque iter effectum iamque in sua litora fessis  
puppibus exierant, cum rex <u>Pandione natam</u>  
in stabula alta trahit, siluis obscura uetustis,  
atque ibi pallentem trepidamque et cuncta timentem  
et iam cum lacrimis ubi sit germana rogantem  
includit fassusque nefas et uirginem et unam  
ui superat, frustra clamato saepe <u>parente</u>,  
saepe <u>sorore</u> sua, <u>magnis</u> super omnia <u>diuis</u>.*  

And now the journey was finished and they had exited the tired ships onto the shore when the king takes the **daughter of Pandion** into high enclosures, hidden by the ancient woods, and then as she grows pale and fearful, afraid of everything, and asks through tears where her sister is, he locks her in, and confessing the unspeakable, he overcomes the virgin alone with force, as she cries out often, in vain, for her **father**, for her **sister**, but above all the **great gods**.

***

### 6. Ov. *Met.* 6.531-536

*mox ubi mens rediit, passos laniata capillos  
[lugenti similis, caesis plangore lacertis,]  
intendens palmas ‘o diris barbare factis,  
o crudelis’ ait, ‘nec te mandata parentis  
cum lacrimis mouere <u>piis</u> nec cura sororis  
nec mea uirginitas nec coniugalia iura?…’*  

Soon, when her mind returned, she tore at her disheveled hair [like a mourner, her arms hewn with beating], and raising her palms, she says, “O barbarian because of your terrible deeds, O cruel one, did not the orders of my father with his **dutiful** tears move you? Nor care for my sister, nor my virginity, nor the laws of marriage?…”

***

### 7. Ov. *Met.* 6.620-623

*ad matrem ueniebat Itys; quid possit, ab illo  
admonita est oculisque tuens immitibus ‘a! quam  
es similis patri’ dixit; nec plura locuta  
triste parat facinus tacitaque exaestuat ira.*  

Itys came to his mother; she was reminded by him what she could do, and watching him with a harsh gaze, she said, “Ah! How like your father you are.” She said no more but prepared a sad deed and burned with a silent anger.

***

### 8. Ov. *Met.* 6.629-632

*sed simul ex nimia mentem <u>pietate</u> labare  
sensit, ab hoc iterum est ad uultus uersa sororis  
inque uicem spectans ambo ‘cur admouet’ inquit  
‘alter blanditias, rapta silet altera lingua?…’*  

But as soon as she felt her resolve totter out of an excess of **dutifulness**, she turned again from [Itys] toward the face of her sister, and looking in turn at both she says, “Why does he ply me with flatteries, but she remains silent, her tongue snatched out?…”

***
